The Best Chocolate Cake Recipe {Ever}

DESSERT — 45 MINS

ROBYN STONE
5 FROM 3794 VOTES
14,297 COMMENTS
JUMP TO RECIPE

This post may contain affiliate links. Please read my disclosure policy.

The Best Chocolate Cake Recipe – A one bowl chocolate cake recipe that is quick, easy, and delicious! Updated with gluten-free, dairy-free, and egg-free options!

The best chocolate cake recipe. Ever? There are plenty of claims for the best chocolate cake recipe. I get that. But with one bite of this decadent, moist chocolate cake with chocolate frosting, every single person around the table commented that this was the best chocolate cake they’d ever tasted.

So as for my house, this chocolate cake recipe now holds that honor.

As the compliments continued, I didn’t begin to tell them how easy it was to make.

In all honesty, it is probably one of the easiest cakes I’ve made in a long time, really, but I just smiled and thanked them.

As we continued on gobbling up the cake, drinking our coffee or iced cold milk, the compliments just kept coming.

Then the requests for the recipe started.

That’s generally when you know that folks really like what you’ve made if they ask for the recipe and tell you for what event they plan to serve it.

As a cook, that really is one of the highest compliments you can receive – well, at least in my book.

The Best Chocolate Cake Recipe Ever

It was great to hear that they thought the cake was just as good after their last bite as they thought it was with their first.

Here’s another great thing about this recipe. The cake batter really can be made in a bowl without the use of a heavy duty mixer. Of course, that just makes things easier, but this is easily a recipe my Grandmother would have enjoyed making in her tiny kitchen with a whisk and a bowl. And I’m sure it would have turned out perfectly, too.

I’m not going to kid you, this makes a very rich, moist chocolate cake recipe. So if you are a faint of heart chocolate cake person, this is not the cake for you.

Based on the Old Fashioned Hershey’s recipe, I sort of went a bit heavy-handed with some changes testing cake after cake until I got it just the way I wanted it, but the end result was oh so worth it. The crumbs left on the plate gave that away.

Ingredients

For this chocolate cake, you’ll need the following ingredients.

all-purpose flour
sugar
unsweetened cocoa powder
baking powder
baking soda
salt
espresso powder – I give more information on the espresso powder below
milk – you can also use buttermilk, almond milk, oat milk, or coconut milk
oil – you can use vegetable, canola or melted coconut oil
eggs – when baking, I like to use room temperature eggs
vanilla extract
boiling water
Step-by-Step Instructions

Prep. Preheat the oven to 350º F. Prepare two 9-inch cake pans by spraying with baking spray or buttering and lightly flouring.

Whisk dry ingredients. Add flour, sugar, cocoa, baking powder, baking soda, salt and espresso powder to a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer. Whisk through to combine or, using your paddle attachment, stir through flour mixture until combined well.

Mix in wet ingredients. Add milk, vegetable oil, eggs, and vanilla to flour mixture and mix together on medium speed until well combined. Reduce speed and carefully add boiling water to the cake batter until well combined.

Bake. Distribute cake batter evenly between the two prepared cake pans. Bake for 30-35 minutes, until a toothpick or cake tester inserted in the center of the chocolate cake comes out clean.

Frost. Remove from the oven and allow to cool for about 10 minutes, remove from the pan and cool completely. Frost with Chocolate Buttercream Frosting.

ESPRESSO POWDER

One of the ingredients that really made this cake recipe come to life, in my opinion, was the addition of espresso powder in both the chocolate cake and in the chocolate frosting.

If you’ve not tried a bit of espresso when baking with chocolate, you really should.

The espresso works to elevate the flavors in much the same way as vanilla extract and I now think of it as an essential part of my spice cabinet.

Espresso powder is easy to find at the grocery store or even online if your grocer doesn’t stock it normally, but I use it fairly frequently and it can become a little pricey. I’ve started making my own homemade espresso powder and since I have I’m not looking back! It is so easy to make and have on hand!

Believe me when I say, it is very much worth the effort to have just for those times you are baking with chocolate!

So my friends, if you have a chocolate cake lover in your midst, make them this cake. If they’ve had a bad day this is certainly something that will brighten it for them. If they’ve had a great day, then this chocolate cake is a great way to celebrate with them!

Let me just say again, this amped up classic chocolate cake + this Chocolate Buttercream Frosting Recipe = the best chocolate cake I’ve ever had!

How to Make Ahead and Store the Homemade Chocolate Cake:

Both the cake and the chocolate frosting can be made ahead. Allow the cakes to cool completely, wrap them well in plastic wrap and place each layer into a gallon zip-top freezer bag. Freeze the cake layers for up to one month.

To frost the cake, simply remove from the freezer and allow to thaw in the refrigerator with wrapping intact. Then, frost the cake once it has completely thawed.

Store the cake at room temperature on the counter. I like to store under a cake dome to keep the cake fresh.

Chocolate Cake Modifications You May Be Interested to Know About:

Note that I have updated the recipe to include some additional ingredients that I have tested through the years. I have found that this chocolate cake is even more versatile than I originally imagined! I’ve listed some of the modifications I’ve tested that I think may be of interest to you.

As a Gluten-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe:

To make the cake as a gluten-free chocolate cake recipe, I’ve successfully used an equal amount of gluten-free flour in place of the all-purpose flour listed in the recipe.

As a Dairy-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe:

To make the cake a dairy-free chocolate cake recipe, I’ve used almond milk as well as coconut milk in place of the dairy. While not dairy-free, I’ve also used buttermilk in place of the milk with great results.

As an Egg-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe:

To make the cake an egg-free chocolate cake recipe, I’ve used 2/3 cup of unsweetened applesauce in place of the 2 large eggs in the recipe. You will note that you may have to bake the cake just a few minutes more. Be sure to check with the skewer for doneness.

I’ve also used Bob’s Red Mill Egg Replacer with great success.

To Use Butter and Other Oils:

I have tested the chocolate cake recipe with additional oils, as well as butter. I’ve tested using an equal amount of melted coconut oil to the vegetable oil called for in the recipe. I’ve also tested using the same volume of melted butter in place of the oils in the chocolate cake. While it does make the cake texture slightly different, it is still delicious and worth trying if you’d prefer to use butter in place of oils in your chocolate cake.

Whew! See what I mean! This is the chocolate cake of everyone’s dreams, I think!

4.98 FROM 3794 VOTES
The Best Chocolate Cake Recipe {Ever}

DESSERT — 45 MINS

PREP TIME
15 MINS
COOK TIME
30 MINS
SERVINGS
24
COURSE
DESSERT
CUISINE
AMERICAN
Author
Robyn Stone | Add a Pinch
 PRINT THE RECIPE
LEAVE A REVIEW
The Best Chocolate Cake Recipe – A one bowl chocolate cake recipe that is quick, easy, and delicious! Updated with gluten-free, dairy-free, and egg-free options!
Ingredients  
1x
2x
3x
▢
2 cups all-purpose flour
▢
2 cups sugar
▢
3/4 cup unsweetened cocoa powder
▢
2 teaspoons baking powder
▢
1 1/2 teaspoons baking soda
▢
1 teaspoon salt
▢
1 teaspoon espresso powder homemade or store-bought
▢
1 cup milk or buttermilk, almond, or coconut milk
▢
1/2 cup vegetable oil or canola oil, or melted coconut oil
▢
2 large eggs
▢
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
▢
1 cup boiling water
▢
Chocolate Buttercream Frosting Recipe
Instructions 
Preheat oven to 350º F. Prepare two 9-inch cake pans by spraying with baking spray or buttering and lightly flouring.
FOR THE CHOCOLATE CAKE:
Add flour, sugar, cocoa, baking powder, baking soda, salt and espresso powder to a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer. Whisk through to combine or, using your paddle attachment, stir through flour mixture until combined well.
Add milk, vegetable oil, eggs, and vanilla to flour mixture and mix together on medium speed until well combined. Reduce speed and carefully add boiling water to the cake batter until well combined.
Distribute cake batter evenly between the two prepared cake pans. Bake for 30-35 minutes, until a toothpick or cake tester inserted in the center of the chocolate cake comes out clean.
Remove from the oven and allow to cool for about 10 minutes, remove from the pan and cool completely.
Frost cake with Chocolate Buttercream Frosting.
Notes
The cake batter will be very thin after adding the boiling water. This is correct and results in the most delicious and moist chocolate cake I’ve ever tasted! xo
Freezer Friendly
Let the baked cake layers cool completely. Wrap them well with plastic wrap and then with foil. Put each layer into a freezer bag and freeze up to 2 months. To serve, thaw in the refrigerator overnight with wrapping intact. The next day, the layers are ready to fill and frost.
High Altitude: If you live at a high altitude, adjust the recipe based upon the altitude for your area. 
Nutritional information is for the cake only.
Nutritional Information
Calories: 124kcal | Carbohydrates: 27g | Protein: 3g | Fat: 1g | Saturated Fat: 1g | Cholesterol: 15mg | Sodium: 178mg | Potassium: 114mg | Fiber: 1g | Sugar: 17g | Vitamin A: 229IU | Vitamin C: 1mg | Calcium: 34mg | Iron: 1mg

SHOUT OUT

Did you make this recipe?

Mention @addapinch or tag #addapinch!

SHARE IT WITH THE WORLD!

Do let me know how you like it.

Here are a few additional ways I like to make this cake!

CHOCOLATE CUPCAKES

If you are looking for cupcakes from this recipe, I’ve shared my recipe for the best chocolate cupcakes with vanilla buttercream frosting. This recipe makes a perfect dozen so that you can scale the recipe to make as many chocolate cupcakes as you need! Talk about easy! 🙂

9×13 CHOCOLATE CAKE

I love this version! It is a delicious, scaled-down version that is just the thing for potlucks, reunions, tailgates, and travels perfectly! I’ve also scaled-down the frosting so that has the frosting to cake ratio that my family prefers. It is a definite winner!

LARGE CHOCOLATE SHEET CAKE

Scaled for a crowd, this recipe bakes beautifully in a rimmed half sheet baking sheet and is perfect for all sorts of get-togethers. Think of it as the 9×13’s big brother! 🙂 This recipe features Fudge Icing, but you can definitely substitute the icing for whatever you fancy!

And there you have it. There are so many ways to enjoy this delicious cake. Practically one for whatever need you might have. But, if I’ve missed one, be sure to let me know and I’ll work on it for you! 🙂

Many of you have asked if there is a way to make a Vanilla Cake Recipe that is just as delicious. Well friends, I’ve tested and tested and tested and now can proudly say – YES! I’ve shared the best Vanilla Cake I’ve ever tasted, too! 🙂

Enjoy!
Robyn xo

From the Add a Pinch recipe archives. Originally published 2012.

CAKE RECIPES
Easy Monkey Bread Recipe

45 MINS

Red Velvet Cake Recipe

50 MINS

How to Tell When Your Cake Is Done
The Best White Cake Recipe {Ever}

40 MINS

ROBYN STONE

Robyn Stone is a wife, mom, blogger, recipe developer, and cookbook author. Welcome to Add a Pinch where I share thousands of delicious, tested and perfected easy recipes that the whole family will love.

MORE ABOUT ME
LEAVE A COMMENT

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Recipe Review 
Recipe Review

COMMENTS
Kirsty January 2, 2023 at 4:08 pm

This looks so yummy. My son is turning 3 in two days time and has asked for a chocolate cake. This will be my recipe! Could I use regular coffee granules / ground coffee in place of the espresso powder? Thank you!

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 2, 2023 at 10:29 pm

Kristy, I didn’t like the flavor when I tried it with coffee granules. You can just omit the espresso powder. The cake is still delicious.

Jason January 2, 2023 at 8:22 pm

Great recipe. The espresso powder really enhances the chocolate flavor.

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 2, 2023 at 10:28 pm

Thanks, Jason. I love the richness of the chocolate flavor with the espresso powder, too.

Crystal January 3, 2023 at 5:24 pm

What could I do to make this a dark chocolate cake? I love the recipe and want to make it for my stepmom but she likes dark chocolate.

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 3, 2023 at 5:36 pm

Crystal, I have made this cake with Hershey’s Special Dark Cocoa powder. It was a rich dark chocolate and was amazing.

Roisin January 4, 2023 at 9:19 am

I’ve made this cake several times and it’s a real crowd pleaser. My family, me included, are fussy when comes to chocolate cake and this one’s perfect.
I usually do it in 8 1/2 inch round cake tins but this time I’m doing it in 7inch round cake tins.
Can you please advise me of cooking times and temperature.

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 4, 2023 at 3:50 pm

Roisin, the cake should bake about 45-50 minutes at 325ºF in the 7-inch pans. Hope you enjoy.

Annelise January 4, 2023 at 5:26 pm

Best chocolate cake ever! It comes out super moist and fluffy.

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 4, 2023 at 11:22 pm

Thank you, Annelise. So happy you enjoy the cake.

Mimi January 4, 2023 at 6:20 pm

Is vegetable or canola oil better for the cake and what brand oil? What is the best way to grease the pans too? Thank you

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 5, 2023 at 1:57 pm

I use vegetable oil in this cake recipe, Mimi. I use butter to grease the pans, making sure I completely cover the bottom and sides of the pan. Then I lightly flour the entire pan, including all sides. Hope this helps.

Tara Stuekerjuergen January 5, 2023 at 12:03 am

I have made this recipe before and I absolutely love it. Last time I made it I made the 9 x 13 recipe, this time I would still like to do it in a 9 x 13 pan but I would like a thicker cake. How long would you suggest that I need to bake it for?

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 5, 2023 at 1:52 pm

Tara, you can make this full recipe in a 9×13 pan. It would need to bake about 35-40 minutes. I hope you enjoy this version of the cake.

Suzie Tyler January 5, 2023 at 3:44 am

Hi there I plan to make this for my son’s birthday, can I make it in advance without freezing? How long does it keep for?
Thank you

REPLY
Robyn Stone January 5, 2023 at 1:51 pm

Suzie, I make mine ahead and it is still moist and delicious. There are several choices for this. I don’t refrigerate mine but you can if you wish. You can completely decorate the cake and store in the refrigerator but make sure it is covered in an airtight container so it won’t become dry. You can also leave the decorated cake under a covered cake dome on the counter and it should last for 3 to 4 days. I hope your son has a very happy birthday and enjoys his cake.

LOAD MORE